Sustaining a Legacy: Carrying Forward His Holiness the Dalai Lama's Vision
Heart to Heart: A Call to Young Tibetan Parents!
Dear Parents! Let me ask you a simple question! What do you aspire for your child or children today and tomorrow? Health & Happiness or Name & Fame? Of course, yes! Health and Happiness, right? I think the majority of us parents deeply aspire for children's good health & happiness over name & fame. If that is so, my second question to you is: What steps do you take every single day to materialise this very aspiration of yours? Please ponder over your everyday thoughts, words and actions, either big or small, with regard to fulfilling your aspiration of giving health & happiness to your child or children. Be honest with yourself!
I strongly believe that to some extent, it is in the hands of parents whether our children will have happy & healthy lives even in this world of comparison & competition, distraction and division. This is the only gift every parent can give to their children, which is the best, long-lasting and can be acquired free of cost. But as every precious thing is rare and limited, this gift is also available for a limited period of time, and the parents need to be mindful to grasp this precious limited moment when the child is young. This is the reason why I have made this call exclusively to young parents, since their children are in the right time to be blessed with this precious gift from an early age.
Here is the key to the precious gift. It's none other than the Tibetan language. Yes! The Tibetan language is the only key to the treasure house of health & happiness. Some of us may know this and prepare our children from a very young age to acquire the key to cherish the treasure of health & happiness throughout life. But some of us may not be as lucky as others to recognise this treasure house and hence may not prepare the children to procure this magic key. Therefore, this is the call from me, mother of three girls, to those who are yet to recognise this treasure house. Trust me, you will never regret it! But if you delay and your children grow without this gift, then either you or your children will surely regret it, and by that time, it'll be too late.
Now you may be asking me how the Tibetan language is related to health & happiness. Yes! Here is the answer! The treasure I mentioned is the Tibetan studies exclusively found in the Tibetan language, especially Tibetan Buddhism, Tibetan medicine and the Tibetan language itself. Physical health is greatly taken care of by Tibetan medicine, and mental health is obviously taken great care of by Buddhism. Why is the modern world being drawn towards this ancient subject these days, especially the modern scientists, whose lives are deeply rooted in reasons and not faith? They do not accept anything that is without any logic or reason. Then why are they so interested in meeting His Holiness the Great 14th Dalai Lama and other learned Buddhist masters? Think carefully. The reason is that they find reasonable solutions to many modern problems, especially of a mental or emotional nature, in this ancient Buddhist science. Hence, Buddhist science is the ultimate treasure house to the whole world, irrespective of colour and creed. And this is the best gift we can offer not only to our children but to the whole world.
But before telling these to our children, we, the adults, need to make conscious efforts to gain conviction in this, and with strong belief, we can encourage our children to follow the same. But we may or may not get quality time to study all these subjects thoroughly, but we can definitely do one thing every single day, and that is listen to the precious words of His Holiness on various related topics. I can assure you that even though you have never studied Buddhism in the past, while listening to His words of wisdom, you'll get the essence of Buddhism. As I did, you too will find your Ikigai for life! His Holiness often refers to the words of Lord Buddha, calling him a scientist: monks or wise ones, like testing the purity of gold, the goldsmith tests it by burning, cutting and rubbing. Likewise, you examine my words well and do not accept them blindly out of respect. I too regard His Holiness as a great scientist as well as a great revolutionary of the 21st century, bridging ancient Buddhist science with modern science and bringing a spiritual revolution in this world of chaos.
I consider myself very fortunate to have become a mother after the launch of the Basic Education Policy for Tibetans in Exile (2004), which gives immense importance to the Tibetan language. This has become the guiding light for me and my husband to raise and nurture our first child, Tenzin Chemi, who is a young girl of 17 years old now, studying in 12th grade at TCV School Selakui. She is passionate about the Tibetan language and wishes to pursue Tibetan medicine after her graduation from school. This is indeed a blessing for me. I wish my younger daughters too follow her in the future to pursue any Tibetan studies they wish. If this wish of mine gets materialised, then I'll be fully content with my life as a mother and as a Tibetan.
It is always inspiring to study Acharya Shantideva's A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life. Here is an example! "If all this earth were to be covered with leather, where would so much leather come from? But covering just the sole of one's foot with leather is like covering the entire earth." How beautiful the metaphor is with which we can easily understand the importance of personal responsibility, inner qualities and inner transformation rather than trying to eliminate the external factors of suffering and obstacles. This is what I am trying to convince you too. If our children are given the key to the treasure house, then they'll be equipped with all the soft skills to retain their happiness and face challenges with grit. Then they will not need any other shield to protect themselves. Once they are convinced of the rich resources in this ancient language, then they will surely continue passing this over to their children and grandchildren.
Once this happens with a few more generations, then the far-sighted vision of His Holiness the Great 14th Dalai Lama gets materialised in principle. So this begins with individual me and you. In His message on 5 July 2025, His Holiness emphasised, "As for myself, I will continue to focus on my commitments of promoting human values, religious harmony, drawing attention to the ancient Indian wisdom which explains the workings of mind and emotions, and Tibetan culture & heritage, which has so much potential to contribute to the world through its emphasis on peace of mind & compassion." Therefore, once the Tibetan language is protected, preserved and promoted, then the third commitment of His Holiness is materialised, because the Tibetan culture & heritage are profoundly rooted in the Tibetan language.
Once the Tibetan language is thoroughly learnt, then the people clearly can understand the rich culture found in this language, which is the culture of warmheartedness & compassion, which eventually helps every individual to enhance their compassionate nature, which ultimately fulfils the first commitment of His Holiness. Once it is convinced of the usefulness of the Tibetan language to develop one's heart, then it is bound to recognise the significance of the Buddhist science and culture, which again helps to materialise the fourth commitment of His Holiness. Religious harmony will automatically follow, because if someone is well-acquainted with the principles of Buddhism, then s/he cannot disrespect any being or any faith but is inspired to respect & learn about other faiths as well to enhance one's practices.
I am deeply influenced by a strong message of His Holiness given to a large gathering of followers from Tibet on 27 March 2006: "One thing that comes to my mind is this: Suppose there are a hundred Tibetan students. Seventy or eighty such students could study the Tibetan language as their main subject and achieve excellence in projecting one's national identity and in preserving our cultural heritage. Twenty or thirty such students could study the Chinese language as their main subject and make efforts to achieve professional qualifications in modern specialised subjects. I feel this to be important; do you understand?" I deeply feel that this message applies more to Tibetans like me and you living in free lands, especially in India, where we have the freedom and opportunity to learn and use the Tibetan language.
I would like to conclude my write-up with an excerpt taken from the latest message of His Holiness on 5 July 2025: "While it is important to work for material development, it is vital to focus on achieving peace of mind through cultivating a good heart and by being compassionate, not just toward near & dear ones, but toward everyone. Through this, you will contribute to making the world a better place." We, the Tibetans, have literally become global citizens, as we are scattered across the globe. So if we make conscious efforts to seriously work on the roadmap shown by His Holiness, then every individual will attain a happy life, who will be able to spread happiness to people around, and it keeps multiplying further. Then, as per the vision of His Holiness, we'll be able to create a compassionate & peaceful world.

