Tibet's Investment in Youth
Tenzin Yangdon

Theme- Building future leadership

A seed that is nourished and nurtured with tenderness eventually matures into a flourishing tree that stays competent to serve as a facilitator to the sphere of humanity and the realm of biodiversity at large. The underlying analogy attempts to imply how a seed, as insignificant as it appears, is rooted with the utmost potential of power as great as a tree if the cultivation in its formative years has been prosperous and attentive. Correspondingly, a developing child is highly prone to the sensitivity of the environmental cues, due to which shaping of such a population with empathetic ideals of shared responsibility, community engagement and secular values, remains paramount in sustaining a peaceful global village.

When the period of extreme expansion of neurological networks in the entire journey of manhood resides early in life, particularly till the age of six, investing in the stimulation of their cognitive development should be the primary resolution of every administration, since a sturdy future force demands a sturdy cognitive grip at its core. As the linguistic maturation serves as an instrumental medium in laying the foundation for one's cognitive, social, emotional and academic formation, exposure to literature at an early age would deeply contribute to building a holistic reflection in an individual. Therefore, the government, teaching professionals, parents, and caregivers should endeavour to orchestrate active efforts in the practice that remains regretfully elusive in the Tibetan diaspora: fostering a reading culture within the community. Because reading is the ultimate weapon to hone our children with new insights on life, fresh comprehension on humanity, shift perspectives on existence, dwell in the minds of past philosophers and question the veracity of one's own outlook- the qualities indispensable for a leader. Therefore, to produce great leaders, numerous initiatives should be introduced at the earliest opportunity to foster great readers. This can be achieved by educating parents about child rearing or establishing academic spheres, such as libraries, where the joy of reading can be ignited through engaging storytelling, literary games, reading circles and creative book clubs. Similarly, indulging the older students in the exploration of biographies of Tibetan and global leaders can deepen historical awareness of our nation while exposing them to real-world political mechanisms. For a country that was stripped of independence and shoved into the margins of exile with an identity on the verge of extinction, it yearns for a visionary leader, grounded in the bedrock of intellectual wisdom and ancestral values. 

Tibet, a nation that has long persisted and continues to seek its leader to lead the masses with compassion, negotiates political antagonists with consideration and imprints the neighbourhood with its kindness, demands a staunch foundation of human values to emerge as its leader. From a historical perspective, the administrative landscape of our Tibetan plateau has witnessed a long trajectory from the grasp of ruthless sovereigns to the spiritual theocrat to the ideals of a representative democracy. But since the ascendency of His Holiness the Dalai Lama and his governance, the fabric of the Tibetan community has interwoven the essence of spirituality within the land's culture and radiated the nation with a touch of spiritual generosity, unique to the political mechanism. Therefore, a land that breeds people who believe in non-violence, diplomacy, and pacifism demands a leader who directs his people on the path of love and peace. 

Nurturing such a compassionate leader could be fostered if ethical and moral insights from the Buddhist philosophy were incorporated into the school curriculum. The principal techniques, like practising lojong for mind training, understanding dependent origination for considering everyone as equally important, meditation for developing self-awareness, identifying ten virtuous deeds for shaping one's ethical conduct and grasping emptiness for detachment from materialism helps to sculpt a leader to be disciplined, considerate, mindful, ethical and selfless. Beyond Buddhist ideals, the recent introduction of secular ethics in the form of the SEE Learning curriculum is a comprehensive tool to help children strengthen their psychological and emotional growth at a young age, when their neuroplasticity is at its peak. Hence, inculcating certain conceptual frameworks of our ancient Buddha Dharma along with secular ethics in the early education, with the simplification of the philosophy's sophistication at an elementary level of course, could be a good catalyst in making the future of our nation and the world hopeful for an abode of virtuousness and uprightness that shuns the prospect of corruption and exploitation as witnessed in contemporary geopolitics, when the absence of compassion in leadership comes at a global cost.

Taking into account the numerous studies that have disclosed how early exposure to environmental stimuli secures a large architecture of a child's psychology, integration of pragmatic life skills -for instance emotional intelligence, decision making, communication skills, public speaking, critical thinking, multilingualism- in the academic curriculum could be a primary driver in equipping the future seeds of Tibet with leadership qualities. A formal academic rubric is structured to feed an individual with theoretical knowledge and wisdom, but though complementary, life skill education sharpens the practical expertise of an individual upon the foundation that has already been laid. Therefore, our Tibetan academic and administrative establishments should endeavor in initiating further policies that would provide vocational training to enhance skills, organise debating societies to advance dialectical thinking, coordinate professional workshops to refine competency in a particular field, orchestrate school-level parliament to advocate political awareness, support internship opportunities to experience hands-on exposure, encourage community service to foster universal responsibility, educate additional languages for promoting cross cultural understanding and arrange peer-mentoring programs for the holistic development of children. 

Beyond facilitating the youth with educational opportunities, the application of that acquired knowledge in the global intellectual space by creating international platforms could be another effective approach to sculpt them to be receptive to diverse perspectives and to widen their horizon of understanding. Sensitivity to account for the sentiments and thoughts of people with an open mindset would ensue unprejudiced and unbiased judgment in a leader, making them the most appropriate navigator in sailing against any tempest. Therefore, traversing beyond one's intellectual parameters to bridge the youth with modern geopolitical literacy, it is essential to engage the youth in the representation of Tibet at global platforms like the United Nations and to facilitate opportunities for cross-cultural exchange programs with other universities as I believe it is our only hope and duty to address the suppressed voice of the Tibetans inside Tibet at a global platform and unveil the dark truths to the world's conscience that remained long hidden. 

In essence, the nature of our exile community is vastly diasporic and profoundly dispersed, rendering it crucial to bring together the aspiring youth within a web of interconnected networks. As I remain highly appreciative of the undertakings of the Central Tibetan Administration in providing leadership workshops for the students and the International Tibetan Youth Forums for the undergraduates, assembling the aspirants would strengthen the spirit of unity within the fabric of community by sparking a sense of collective responsibility, shared visions, intellectual discussions, mutual encouragement and fusion of perspectives regarding the long-standing Tibetan issue. Therefore, our governing bodies could strive in the construction of a cohesive Tibetan community where youth in every corner of the world would collectively and unanimously echo the voice of Tibet.

Great leaders do not manifest spontaneously but rather should be forged since early upbringing through an unwavering foundation of learning, empathy and opportunity. Particularly, exile Tibetans, more than ever, pursue a leadership directed to the path of wisdom and compassion. Ultimately, the youth today shall be the fate of Tibet tomorrow, and the wisest investment of the present authorities would rest in the construction of an intellectual and practical groundwork within them.


